picture_counter_0 no image summary

Colorado potato beetle, Leptinotarsa decemlineata , a native of the U.S., is a destructive insect pest of certain plants in the Solanaceae (nightshade) family including potato, eggplant, and tomato. The larvae and adult can cause extensive plant damage if not managed. This publication provides information on biology and damage, and discusses the management strategies that can mitigate plant damage caused by Colorado potato beetle larvae and adults. ## Biology

Colorado potato beetle adults are approximately ⅜ inches (9.5 mm) long, yellow-cream to orange, and oval-shaped with 10 black stripes extending lengthwise on the wing covers (Figures 1 and 2). The Colorado potato beetle adult overwinters in the soil. Adults emerge and become active in May or when early-planted potatoes are present. Adults feed for five to 10 days before females mate with males (Figure 3). Females lay clusters of 10 to 40 bright yelloworange eggs on the undersides of potato leaves (Figure 4), which protect the eggs from direct sunlight. Females can lay up to 500 eggs over a four- to five-week period. Figures 1 and 2. Adult Colorado potato beetles. (Photos: Raymond Cloyd)

picture_counter_1 no image summary

Figures 3 and 4. Colorado potato beetle adults (male and female) mating (left) and egg cluster located on leaf underside (right). (Photos: Raymond Cloyd)

picture_counter_2 no image summary

Larvae emerge (eclose) from eggs in three to 10 days, depending on air temperature, and begin feeding on potato leaves (Figure 5). There are four larval instars. The first- and second-instar larvae are less than ½ inch (12.7 mm) long, dark-red with black heads, humpbacked, and have two rows of black spots on both sides of the body (Figure 6). Third- and fourth-instar larvae are approximately ½ inch (12.7 mm) long and pink to salmon in color with black heads. The larvae have two rows of black spots on both sides of the body (Figure 7). After two to three weeks, fourth-instar larvae fall from plants onto the soil surface and tunnel 3 to 12 inches (15.4 to 30.5 cm) into the soil where they pupate. After two to three weeks, depending on soil temperature, new adults emerge and start another generation. The life cycle (egg to adult) can be completed in approximately 21 days. Adults start feeding and can cause extensive plant damage. Females mate with males and then lay eggs. Larvae emerge (eclose) from eggs and feed on plants for four to six weeks. In late summer, adults tunnel six to 12 inches (15.2 to 30.5 cm) into the soil to overwinter. There can be up to three generations per year. ## Damage

Larvae and adults of Colorado potato beetle feed on potato leaves, resulting in the removal of leaf tissue and plant stunting (Figures 8 and 9). Extensive feeding can result in complete defoliation. The third- and fourth-instar larvae cause the most damage (75%) to plants because they consume more leaf tissue than the first- and second-instar larvae. Effects on potato yield may differ depending on the

Figures 5, 6, and 7. Early-instar larvae of Colorado potato beetle feeding on potato leaf (left and center) and mature Colorado potato beetle larva (right). (Photos: Raymond Cloyd)

picture_counter_3 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

timing and amount of feeding by Colorado potato beetle larvae or adults. In fact, potatoes can tolerate 30% defoliation without a reduction in yield; however, this depends on timing of feeding and cultivar planted. ## Management

## Scouting

Early in the growing season check plants at least once a week for the presence of larvae and adults.