2014; Reay-Jones  and  Reisig  2014;  Reay-Jones  et  al. 2016;  Bibb  et  al. 2018). Because H. zea is  a  major economic pest in cotton and because H. zea moths that developed on corn can migrate to cotton, selection pressure on H. zea in Bt corn has major implications for the pest status on injury to Bt cotton. Practical resistance in H. zea was  recently  documented  in  pyramided  Bt  cotton  expressing  two Cry  toxins,  with  increased  insecticidal  applications  in  fields  with increased boll injury (Reisig  et  al. 2018). New  triple-toxin  cotton varieties express combinations of two Cry proteins and Vip3A, and their adoption should lead to a reduction in injury and the need to use supplemental applications of insecticides. However, widespread selection  pressure  with  Vip3A  with  increased  usage  of  this  toxin across two major crops will likely lead to reduced durability, and underlines the importance of adopting IRM practices such as planting of non-Bt corn refuge. While H. zea remains a minor pest in field corn, this crop plays a major role in the landscape contribution of moths with widespread selection pressure to multiple Bt toxins. Another concern for the pest status of H. zea is the potential establishment of the invasive H. armigera in the United States (Kriticos et al. 2015). Native to the Old World, the insect was found in South America in 2013, and in Puerto Rico in 2014. As H. armigera and H. zea are morphologically similar related species that both cause damage to reproductive tissue of cultivated plants, the introduction of H. armigera into  the Americas presents challenges for management and IRM. Helicoverpa armigera has a greater genetic diversity than H. zea and has developed resistance to several Bt toxins (Bird and Downes 2014, Anderson et al. 2018). Furthermore, a point mutation conferring resistance to Cry1Ac in H. armigera in China was recently shown to have single-allele dominant resistance (Jin et al. 2018). Hybridization between the two species could lead to new ecotypes with enhanced pest status and resistance levels to insecticides (Anderson et al. 2018).