Pollet, Ph.D. Professor and Extension Specialist, Entomology

Boris A. Castro, Ph.D. Assistant Professor &amp; Extension Specialist, Entomology

Visit our Web site: www.lsuagcenter.com

Figure B. Bee stinger with venom sacs. picture_counter_5 no image summary

Figure C: Bee stinger without venom sacs. picture_counter_6 no image summary

## Reactions to Stings

Although some people are allergic to insect stings or bites, people can receive several stings with only a slight swelling or reddening and itching occurring. If one is allergic, the reaction from one sting is excessive swelling that could reach the throat and cause anaphylactic shock and death. If you have noticed more than the usual slight swelling from an insect bite or sting, contact your doctor for a test. If you are found to be sensitive, you will be advised to carry an EpiPen antidote injector to help relieve symptoms resulting from such a bite or sting. You should know that just because you have not been allergic in the past does not mean your system will not change. A large gain or loss in weight, taking strong medicine, surgery or a serious injury may cause your body's physiology to change and become susceptible. ## In Case of Attack

If you are stung by bees or wasps, seek cover immediately. Run away quickly and get inside a building or a vehicle if available but get as far away as possible in the shortest amount of time. Once in a secure place, tend to your injuries. ## Beekeepers and Bee Products

Beekeepers are our first line of protection against Africanization of an area. The management of European honeybee colonies offers a degree of reproductive competition with Africanized bees. This competition leads to hybridization of the feral colonies in an area and a possible lessening of their defensive behavior. Plus, beekeepers have the knowledge to help you with bee problems. Beekeepers also provide us with a service to agriculture and several products produced by honeybees. Honeybees help provide us with most of the food we eat, either directly by pollinating food crops or indirectly by pollinating food sources consumed by domestic animals and wildlife. They produce honey and pollen that can be used as food or supplements in food. They also produce beeswax used in candles, cosmetics, wood and masonry sealers, and as a lubricant or rust preventive on metal. Louisiana State University Agricultural Center William B.