The male typically moves around faster than the female. In  winter,  females  enter  a  resting  stage  and  overwinter wherever they can find protection in the soil, crevices, or ground litter. With the start of warmer weather, females become active and begin laying eggs on host plants. In greenhouses, females do not enter a resting stage, so mite populations are continuous throughout the year. Females

<!-- page_break -->

A spider mite damaged leaf (top) and healthy leaf (bottom). Photo: Clyde S. Gorsuch

picture_counter_3 no image summary

lay up to six eggs in a day and average one-hundred eggs in a lifetime. Eggs hatch in about eight days at 50°F , and require only three days at 75°F. Spider mites go through three developmental stages between egg and adult, larva (six-legged), protonymph, and deutonymph. During each molt, the mite attaches itself to the surface of the plant and forms a chrysalis. The first obvious sign of spider mite infestation is stippling on the upper surfaces of the leaves. This looks like the leaves  have  been  pierced  with  many  tiny  needles. The stippling occurs when spider mites pierce individual cells of  a  leaf  with  their  chelicerae  (needle-like  mouthparts), releasing the cell's cytoplasm. A heavy infestation of spider mites can reduce photosynthesis, cause leaves to fall off, and eventually cause the death of the plant. Large amounts of webbing around the terminal ends of upright branches is a sure sign of heavy spider mite infestation . A possible reason  for  webbing  being  attached  to  the  terminals  of plants is because this is the area where humidity is lowest. The  webbing  is  spun  everywhere  the  spider  mites  go. Individual  silk  strands  can  be  seen  on  the  underside  of leaves with the aid of a magnifier. Detection of spider mites for making treatment decisions can be accomplished by viewing the underside of leaves using at least a 10x lens. Another detection method is to beat  leaves  and  stems  over  a  white  piece  of  paper. Dislodged  spider  mites  can  be  seen  as  little  "specks" running around on the paper. The size of the spider mite "specks" on the paper is about the same size as the period at the end of this sentence. Cultural  controls  for  some  spider  mite  species  can  be attained  by  maintaining  an  environment  that  is  high  in humidity and low in temperature. High humidity encourages pathogenic fungi that attack the mites, and low temperature  slows  reproductive  rates. A  high  pressure spray of water directed to the undersides of leaves will wash the spider mites off. This needs to be done about

Spider mite webbing on juniper. Photo: Clyde S. Gorsuch

picture_counter_4 no image summary

every three days to be effective. Encouragement of natural enemies such as lady beetles, predatory  thrips,  and  predatory  mites  (Phytoseiidae)  is helpful in suppression of mite populations. Natural enemies may be encouraged by keeping plants healthy, by choosing pesticides specific for mites and by spraying only when the pest  population  density  has  reached  an  economic  or aesthetic threshold. Most broad-spectrum chemical insecticides kill the beneficial insects and mites, and thus induce an increase in the spider mite population. Chemical control is usually needed at some point. Spraying with a labeled miticide kills only the nymphs and adults; the eggs are unaffected by most miticides. Therefore, two treatments  should  normally  be  applied  at  an  interval  of approximately one week. Mite suppression can be obtained with horticultural oils and  insecticidal  soaps. These materials have no residual activity and must come in direct contact with the mites. However, they both will kill the egg stage. Sulfur will provide suppression of mites. Traditional miticides often contain the active ingredient hexakis. For  other  publications  in  our  Entomology  Insect Information Series visit our web site at http://entweb.clemson.edu/cuentres/eiis/index.htm

Prepared by David W.