picture_counter_0 no image summary

## Hornworms on Tomatoes in New Hampshire

Dr. Alan T. Eaton, Extension Specialist, Entomology

We have two species of hornworms that feed on tomato foliage (occasionally the fruit) in New Hampshire. The most common by far is the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta . Much less frequently encountered is the tomato hornworm, Manduca quinquemaculata. Growers in Coos County and northern Grafton and Carroll counties have relatively few problems with these pests, compared to growers in southern New Hampshire. The scientific names give a clue how to tell the huge hummingbird-sized moths apart. The tobacco hornworm has six pairs of orange spots down the sides of its abdomen, while the tomato hornworm has five pairs. In New Hampshire the adults usually appear in July or August. They  fly at night, and females locate tomato plants by odor, and lay their eggs singly on the leaves. Eggs are about 2mm long, and are about the same green color as tomato leaves. After several days, the eggs hatch into tiny caterpillars, each with a very long 'horn' at the rear end. The caterpillars begin feeding on leaves. At first, they make small holes in the leaves, but as they get larger, they end up eating the entire leaves, leaving behind the main mid-rib. When they have fully grown, they can be over three inches long. The two species are easy to tell apart in the caterpillar stage. Tobacco hornworm has diagonal white markings on its side, and the older caterpillars often develop red color on the 'horn' . The tomato hornworm has v-shaped white markings on the sides, and the horn on older larvae is often blue-ish. When fully grown, the larva drops off the plant and burrows into loose soil, where it pupates. Pupae of hornworm moths (the family is called sphinx moths) are large and brown. The long mouthparts project like the handle of an acient Greek amphora. The pupae of neither species can survive New Hampshire winters (where the soil freezes). Therefor, this species formerly was not found here until late June or July each year, when the first adults flew to New

Egg of tobacco hornworm. picture_counter_1 no image summary

picture_counter_2 no image summary

The long mouthparts of the hornworm pupa  project  like  the  handle  of  an ancient Greek amphora. This tobacco hornworm larva is very young, probably 2nd instar. picture_counter_3 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

This pupa was found in the soil by tomato plants. picture_counter_4 no image summary

Nearly full-grown larva of tobacco hornworm. picture_counter_5 no image summary

Hampshire from farther south.