citri. ( It is also known as Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri , and previously as Xanthosomas axonopodis pv. citri ). Strains of Xanthomonas pv . citri are recognised distinguished by host range. ## Distribution

Asia, Africa, North, South and Central America, the Caribbean, Europe, Oceania. There are four strains with different distributions. Citrus canker is recorded from Australia (Northern Territory), Fiji, Guam, Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, and Solomon Islands. ## Hosts

Citrus species, including grapefruit, kumquat, lemon, lime, mandarin, orange, pomelo and tangerine, as well as other genera in the citrus family (Rutaceae), e.g., Fortunella and Poncirus . ## Symptoms &amp; Life Cycle

Bacterial canker causes loss of plant vigour, leaves fall early, and fruit drop before it is mature. Fruits with canker infections are unsightly and cannot be sold. It is particularly serious on grapefruit, lemon, limes and oranges. Brown raised spots - described as craters, pustules or blisters - occur on the leaves surrounded by yellow haloes (Photos 1&amp;2). The spots are up to 10 mm diam., depending on time of infection and variety. They occur on both sides of the leaves (Photos 3&amp;4). The centres of older spots fall out. Similar spots occur on the leaf stalks and twigs and these develop into cankers, causing stem or branch dieback. The spots on the fruit do not have yellow margins (Photo 5). The disease is common in countries where it is hot with high rainfall. Infection occurs on young leaf flushes, stems and fruits, then declines as fewer new leaves are formed and fruits mature. It is common on seedlings in nurseries (Photo 6). Short-distance spread occurs when water flows over the spots; bacteria ooze out of the spots and are spread by wind-driven rain and water-splash. They enter the leaves through natural openings, helped by winds of more than 30 kph, and wounds, especially those made by leafminers, Phyllocnistis citrella ( see Fact Sheet no. 240 ). Pruning can also cause wounds which are entry points for bacteria. Spread over long distances occurs during cyclones and on nursery plants. Canker lesions ooze bacteria, which are spread by strong winds. The winds also damage the trees and force the bacteria into natural openings and wounds. Spread also occurs on tools and other farm equipment, on people, birds and insects, on tree prunings and nursery plants. The bacteria survive in the raised spots on leaves and fruit until they fall, and then for a few months in leaf litter in the soil. They also survive on weeds, some of which are infected. The spots or blisters can be confused with citrus scab, a disease caused by a fungus ( see Fact Sheet no. 48 ). However, leaves infected by citrus canker are not misshapen. ## Impact

picture_counter_0 no image summary

Photo 1. Spots - blister or craters - caused by citrus canker, Xanthomonas citri . Note the spots are surrounded by a yellow halo or margin, and that the leaves are not distorted as they are by citrus scab, Elsinoë fawcettii. picture_counter_1 no image summary

Photo 2. Close-up of the pustules formed by citrus canker, Xanthomonas citri , showing yellow haloes. Photo 3. Top side of the leaf showing pustules of citrus canker, Xanthomonas citri , without haloes. picture_counter_2 no image summary

Photo 4. Underside of the leaf in Photo 3, showing pustules of citrus canker, Xanthomonas citri , without haloes. (Note the dark margins to the spots is not typical of scab, Elsinoë fawcettii ). picture_counter_3 no image summary

Bacterial canker is the most important disease of the citrus. It is of great concern to countries that have citrus industries that are yet free from the disease. Major citrus-growing countries, Australia, Brazil, and the USA, have all had incursions of the disease, some more than once, which have been extremely costly in efforts to eradicate. Some attempts have been successful, others not. The attempt to eradicate the 1995 introduction of the disease to Florida failed and was called off in 2006. Australia has been more fortunate and Queensland was declared free from the disease in 2009 after the destruction of large numbers of citrus of all kinds - commercial and backyard. <!-- page_break -->

## Detection &amp; inspection

Look for the raised spots, light brown at first, gradually darkening and forming a crater, on leaves, stems and fruit.