This is usually as a pupa and the following year adult moths will emerge to start the cycle again. Figure9.Thecaterpillarsof largeyellowunderwing (Noctua pronuba) a very abundant moth in the UK that caneasilybemistakenforSpodopteracaterpillars,they havebothbrownandgreenforms andmarkingsare similar.However,theblackmarkings along thebody arenotaspronouncedandtrapezoidal inshapeasthat of Spodoptera,appearing more as a series of dashes than distinctshapes. CrownCopyright

picture_counter_9 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

## Dispersal and Detection

The caterpillars of Spodoptera can be very damaging. The caterpillars chew holes in the leaves and can completely defoliate plants if present in large numbers. Stems, buds, flowers and fruits may also be damaged. Finding caterpillars in the day can be difficult due to their cryptic feeding habits (Fig 10) (often feeding internally in fruits) and their nocturnal behaviour. However, the feeding damage caused by the caterpillars can be seen along with the frass (excrement) that's also left behind. The frass resembles a small pellet and will have a wet texture if it is fresh. The observable damage to the crop will depend on the life stage of the caterpillars. Early instars will cause windowing of the leaves. Due to the small size of the caterpillars, they cannot chew through the whole leaf so feed on either the top or bottom layer leaving behind the other transparent layer of the leaf (Fig 11). As the caterpillars grow and their mouth parts become larger, they are able to feed on more of the leaf and can strip leaves down to just the midrib (Fig 12). In some instances, they can behave as 'cut worms' and chew through the stems of young plants at ground level. As the caterpillars reach their final instar, they move from feeding on foliage/leaves to buds and fruits. Some caterpillars bore into fruit and start feeding internally, making them harder to spot. Adult Spodoptera are strong fliers and can fly hundreds of kilometres at night and one species regularly migrates from continental Europe to the UK. Caterpillars of some species such as the fall armyworm ( S. frugiperda ) are capable of dispersing en-masse to find food but have a restricted dispersal of just tens of metres. The most likely method for wider dispersal is the transportation of eggs or caterpillars on produce or plants for planting.