Additional treatment may be required if more than one unhatched egg mass remains per 20 plants. No economic thresholds are available for European corn borer in hemp or quinoa. ## Control

## Cultural Control

Stalk Management : Stalk shredding during or after harvest can significantly reduce European corn borer from overwintering. In Manitoba, time of planting does not alter the severity of the corn borer infestation due the much longer oviposition (egg-laying) period. Crop rotation will also help control populations. ## Resistant Cultivars of Corn

Cultivars of Bt corn (which express proteins from a naturally occurring soil bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis ) are available which are resistant to feeding by European corn borer, and for some cultivars feeding by certain other caterpillars. There are many different strains of Bt, each specific to a different group of insects. There are four Bt proteins that can make corn plants resistant to European corn borer (Cry1F, Cry1Ab, Cry1A.105 and Cry2Ab2)). If there is prolonged exposure to a Bt proteins, European corn borer populations can start to change genetically, so the protein no longer kill them at high levels, hence becoming resistant to Bt corn. The following steps are necessary to prevent European corn borer from becoming resistant to Bt corn. Refuge of a non-Bt cultivar : If planting cultivars of Bt corn, a refuge of a non-Bt cultivar is required to be planted to reduce the odds of European corn borer developing resistance to Bt corn. There are 2 types of refuge. Many cultivars of Bt corn will be purchased containing an integrated refuge (sometimes referred to as refuge-in-a-bag), where seeds of a refuge cultivar have been pre-mixed with seeds of the Bt cultivar in the bag. This integrated refuge typically comprises 5% of the seeds in the bag. Other Bt cultivars will not have an integrated refuge blended in, in which case blocks or strips of a cultivar of corn susceptible to European corn borer needs to be planted within or adjacent to the Bt cultivar. This is called a structured refuge . Having a non-Bt refuge is a requirement set by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. Failure to comply with refuge requirements may lead to insect resistance, slow down the introduction of new Bt corn technologies, and affect individual grower's access to these products. Growers of Bt corn are also required to monitor their crop for the presence of European corn borer and any feeding damage. Avoid planting cultivars with only one Bt toxin :  Do not plant Bt hybrids that contain only one European corn borer Bt toxin and avoid planting hybrids that have the same Bt toxins each year. <!-- page_break -->

A table of currently commercialized Bt corn cultivars in Canada, showing refuge requirements and the Bt proteins providing protection, is available at: https://cornpest.ca/transgenic-corn/#corn-available

Reduced mortality to the Bt protein Cry1F has been detected in European corn borers from Manitoba in lab testing, although unexpected damage to Bt corn has not been seen in fields in Manitoba. However, it is highly recommended to avoid growing corn hybrids that just contain Cry1F for protection from European corn borer. ## Biological Control

There are many natural enemies that will feed on corn borer larvae. These include lady beetle adults and larvae, syrphid or hover fly larvae and green lacewing larvae. Minute pirate bugs will search for and feed on eggs of European corn borer and other caterpillars on corn. Natural enemies may not provide adequate control in outbreak situations. In non-outbreak situations it is important to not apply chemical control measures unless the economic threshold is reached so that the populations of beneficial insects will not be affected. A parasitoid of European corn borer called Trichogramma has been used in some parts of Canada for the management of European corn borer in sweet corn. Trichogramma parasitizes the eggs of European corn borer. Birds may also prey on European corn borer larvae. Overwintering crows will perforate cornstalks and eat overwintering larvae of European corn borer. Red-winged blackbirds will also consume larvae of European corn borer, although they can also damage standing corn. ## Chemical Control

Insecticides should only be applied when economic thresholds have been surpassed.