picture_counter_0 no image summary

## Background

Thrips  are  tiny  slender  cigar-shaped  insects  with fringed  wings,  all  from  the  order  Thysanoptera (pronounced Thigh-san-op-terra). Most thrips encountered  in  production  nurseries  are  pale  to dark  brown,  but  may  sometimes  be  black. They feed by rupturing the outer layer of plant cells and sucking up cell contents. This results in scarring, stippling, flecking, russeting or silvering of the leaf surface, scaring of the developing fruit, discolouration and scaring of flowers or distortion of  new  growth,  depending  upon  where  feeding occurs. Thrips can also vector a  number  of serious plant viruses that can affect a large number of plant species. Thrips feeding is usually accompanied by black flecks of frass or excrement (Fig. 1). Not all thrips are plant feeders, some  species  feed  on  fungi  or  pollen  and  are often non-damaging. Certain thrips are predators that  feed  on  other  insects  (including  thrips)  and mites. In  Australia,  there  are  more  than  35  species  of thrips recognised as pests of a range of horticultural, ornamental and forestry crops (Table 1). Some of these thrips are more serious pests to the  production  nursery  industry  than  others;  i.e. they tend to cause greater damage and may feed on a larger number of plant species. For example, western  flower  thrips  is  a  very  serious  pest  for which  a  factsheet  has  been  specifically  written. Some species can also be resistant to a range of pesticide products. Since  many  thrips  have  significant  variation  in colouration,  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  them based on this trait. Identifying thrips in the field is extremely difficult and can only be carried out by an experienced diagnostician with a high powered microscope;  in  most  cases  thrips  must  be  slide mounted to be identified to species level. Species

Fig. 1. Greenhouse  thrips  infestation  including  larvae stages  and  a  single  adult  (top  right  of  image). Also  note black excrement. Photo by David Cappaert, Bugwood.org

picture_counter_1 no image summary

level  identification  is  recommended  when  damage consistently occurs, if management actions fail and occasionally as part of routine monitoring. This can allow  access  to  additional  information  that  may  be specific to the management of the particular species

picture_counter_2 no image summary

picture_counter_3 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

in the crop, e.g. alternate host plants seasonality and pesticide efficacy. ## General biology

The  word  Thysanoptera  is  derived  from  the  Greek word ' thysanos ' meaning fringe and ' ptera ' meaning wings, referring to the distinct setae, or fringed hairs on their wings. Thrips are small insects ranging from 0.5-2mm  and  occasionally  up  to  about  14mm  in length. The  thrips  body  is  cylindrical  in  shape,  the head  is  narrow  forming  a  conical  mouth  opening. Adults  may  be  winged  or  wingless. When  present, both pairs of  wings  are  slender,  with  long  marginal hair-like fringes. The  life  cycle  of  thrips  includes  an  egg,  two  larval stages  that  actively  feed,  followed  by  two  or  three non-feeding pupal stages (Fig. 2 -lifecycle diagram). Eggs  are  often laid into plant tissue (stems,  leaves,  flowers  or  fruit),  but  some  species lay their eggs on the plant surface. Immature thrips (larvae) are similar in appearance to adults, but are generally  paler  in  colour  and  are  always  wingless. Many species pupate in soil or leaf litter layers, but some  pupate  on  the  plant itself, particularly in flowers and other protected areas on the plant. This has management implications that will be discussed later. The emerging adults are generally winged, but depending on the sex and species, some have short wings and others are wingless. Thrips are similar to bees, ants and wasps in that a fertilised  egg  becomes  a  female  individual  and  an unfertilised egg becomes a male. Most species have males  and  females,  but  some  lack  males  or  only produce males rarely. In such species, females can lay  eggs  that  become  female  individuals  without mating. Some  species  can  reproduce  sexually  or asexually,  though  the  exact  reason  for  doing  so  is not clearly known. The length of the life cycle depends on environmental conditions and the quality of the food source. In  warm  conditions,  around  30°C,  the  life cycle  can  be  completed  in  less  than  2  weeks. The same  species  at  20°C  might  take  3  weeks  to complete the lifecycle. Development time and reproduction  decreases  in  winter  but  breeding  is likely to continue throughout winter in most of Australia, particularly in protected cropping environments. In  very  cool  periods,  thrips  tend  to overwinter as larvae or adults in the soil or as adults on plants, leaf litter or bark. For species that overwinter  in  the  soil,  it  is  typically  achieved  at  a depth of 20-30cm but some species may pupate as deep  as  100cm  depending  on  soil  conditions. For those  species  that  overwinter,  dormancy  tends  to end when temperatures rise in spring. Under good conditions, adult thrips may live for 2-6 weeks, depending on the species. Females may lay 80-300  eggs,  depending  upon  the  species,  host plant and  environmental  conditions. As  such, thrips

Fig. 2. Thrips  pupal  stages  (above);  adult  thrips  of various species (middle); generalised thrips lifecycle (below - reproduced with permission, Mark S. Hoddle UC Davis)

picture_counter_4 no image summary

picture_counter_5 no image summary

picture_counter_6 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

have the capacity to build up to large numbers in a relatively short period of time. World-wide  there  are  about  6000  species  of  thrips currently described. Of this number, less than 10% are considered economic pests of plant commodity crops. There  are  two  groups  (sub-orders) of  thrips. The most commonly encountered group in production  nurseries  are  relatively  small,  cream  to pale, dark brown or sometimes black. Larvae tend to be  cream  to  pale  brown  in  colour. This  suborder (Terebrantia -pronounced Terra-brant-eea) includes many of the serious economically damaging species, e.g. western flowers thrips, onion thrips,  plague  thrips  and  other  species  that  often feed  on  a  relatively  large  number  of  plant  species. This group tends to feed in flowers and growing tips and on leaves and fruit. Not all thrips from this suborder feed on plants, some are predators and a very few feed on moss. The other sub-order (Tubulifera - pronounced tubeyou-lif-era) tend to be larger (up to about 14mm) and often have a relatively long tube-like terminal abdominal segment (hence the name). This group is dominated by fungal feeding, leaf-litter species, but some  species feed on plants and may  cause economic damage. In many cases, tubuliferan thrips are  black,  heavily  scleritised  and  larvae  are  often yellow to orange in colour (Fig. . ## Damage

In Australia, only a relatively small number  of species  are  considered  pests  (Table  1),  although this  does  not  include  tubuliferan  pest  thrips. Thrips larvae and adults feed on various plant parts, pupal stages  do  not. Members  of  both  sub-orders  probe vegetation  with  their  stylets,  using  their  raspingsucking mouthparts to damage  individual cells, emptying cell  contents  which  are  sucked up. While collectively  thrips  can feed on growing tips, flowers buds, petals, pollen, new and old leaves and stems, some species feed in specific areas. Some species may exclusively feed within flowers, others may feed on flowers, leaf buds and expanding leaves. Feeding  on  older  leaves  may  cause  relatively  mild damage including the formation of silvery patches that turn  brown  as  the  cell  tissues  dry  up  beneath  the epidermis  (Fig. 3). This  reduces  photosynthesis  and can  induce  premature  leaf  fall. Damage  tends  to  be visible almost immediately after feeding occurs. Damage  resulting  from  feeding  on  new  growth  or between  plant  parts  tends  to  be  delayed,  i.e. plant growth must occur for the damage to become visible (Fig. 4). As the tissue develops it may then cause leaf distortion, leaf scarring, petal scarring and or leaf drop and rind blemishes. Faecal droplets, which turn black as  mould  grows  on  them,  frequently  accompany damage. Larvae  tend  to  be  more  damaging  than adults  as  they  are  often  in  greater  numbers  and  are less mobile than adults. As such, damage is concentrated. Oviposition  can  also  cause  damage  to

Fig. 3. Typical leaf scarring from  thrips feeding (above photo  by Whitney Cranshaw, Colorado State University); leaf puckering caused by thrips (below - photo by Carroll E. Younce, USDA Agricultural Research Service).