2007). Levels of antibiosis against H. zea can vary considerably among corn hybrids (e.g., Knapp et al. 1967, Wiseman and Snook 1996). Waiss et al. (1979) reported that maysin, a flavone lycoside, slowed growth of H. zea and was associated with antibiotic resistance in corn. Non-preference was reported for some corn genotypes for silk feeding (Wiseman et al. 1983) and oviposition (Widstrom et al. 1979). More recent work identified corn genotypes resistant to H. zea despite having low levels of maysin, indicating a new mechanism of resistance (Abel et al. 2000). While resistant genotypes and mechanisms have been identified, transgenic corn traits expressing Bt toxins currently dominate genetic resistance in corn to H. zea , though combining Bt traits with innate resistant germplasm to multiple pests would benefit corn production (Ni et al. 2007). ## Cultural Practices

Only a limited number of studies have been published on cultural practices as a management tactic for H. zea in corn. However, the status of corn as a preferred host for H. zea in the landscape makes any kind of cultural practice based on habitat manipulation a major challenge. This is underlined by the fact that corn has been used as the trap crop itself for H. zea in other crops, including soybean (Javaid

Fig. 2. Helicoverpa  zea larva  feeding  on  corn  ear. Photo: Thomas  Bilbo, Clemson University. picture_counter_2 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

et  al. 2005)  and  cotton  (Lincoln  and  Isely  1947). Among cultural practices in field corn, planting early can help to avoid high H. zea pressure later in the season (Buntin et al. 2004). Ear infestations of H. zea decreased with increasing rates of nitrogen fertilizer, which was attributed to reduced moth pressure during the earlier silking that  occurred  with  higher  nitrogen  rates,  in  addition  to  increased husk tightness (Klostermeyer 1950). Because H. zea overwinters in the soil as pupae (Phillips and Barber 1929), tillage has been investigated as a cultural practice to reduce populations by either disrupting emergence  tunnels  or  causing  direct  mortality  (Barber  and  Dicke 1937). This approach dubbed 'pupae busting' has been successfully adopted to manage the closely related species Helicoverpa armigera Hübner after harvest of cotton in Australia (Fitt 1994). However, the complexity of the landscape in the southern and southeastern United States with a multitude of H. zea host plants suggest the use of tillage may not be feasible as a control tactic to reduce significant proportions of the pest population, in addition to widespread tillage leading to substantial increases in soil erosion (Montgomery 2007). Furthermore, tillage would be impossible to manage H. zea infestations developing in corn ears, as this would need to be done prior to harvest. ## Biological Control

Several species of egg parasitoids have been reported in the United States,  including Trichogramma  pretiosum Riley, Trichogramma exiguum Pinto  and  Platner  (Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatidae), and Telenomus heliothidis Ashmead (Hymenoptera: Scelionidae) (Puterka et al. 1985, Kauffman and Kennedy 1989). Corn earworm larvae are relatively protected from natural enemies within corn ears relative to other crops such as cotton and soybean (Manley et al. 1991). Only 6% of H. zea larvae collected in corn ears in trials in South Carolina were parasitized, with the main species being the tachinid larval-pupal parasitoid Archytas marmoratus (Townsend) (Diptera: Tachinidae) (Manley et al. 1991). Inundative releases of A. marmoratus in  Georgia  showed  potential  as  a  component  of an IPM program (Proshold et al. 1998). Other larval parasitoids of H. zea include Microplitis croceipes (Cresson) (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) and Campoletis sonorensis (Cameron) (Hymenoptera: Ichneumonidae) (Puterka et al. 1985, Manley et al.