citri ). It can cause severe damage to all citrus cultivars and some citrus relatives. The disease is not a risk to human or animal health but makes fruit unsightly and unmarketable. The disease was introduced into the United States from Japan in the early 1900s. Through quarantine and eradication programs initiated by the federal government and states affected by the disease, citrus canker appeared to have been eradicated from Texas

## Information current as of March 2022

A quarantine is a tool to isolate, reduce, and eradicate potential disease outbreaks. In February 2016, the Texas Department of Agriculture (TDA) quarantined the area in Cameron County where citrus canker samples from lime and lemon trees originated. The United States Department of Agriculture-Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA-APHIS) recognized this quarantine in June 2016, meaning that both state and federal citrus canker quarantine rules regulate citrus in this area. Currently, portions of Brazoria, Cameron, Fort Bend, Galveston, Harris, and Hidalgo Counties are under TDA and USDA-APHIS quarantines for citrus canker. Please visit this resource on the  Texas Department of Agriculture website for the most current information on quarantined areas in Texas:

https://www.texasagriculture.gov/RegulatoryPrograms/ PlantQuality/PestandDiseaseAlerts/CitrusCanker.aspx

1 Professor and Extension Plant Pathologist, Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Extension Service, The Texas A&amp;M University System

- 2 Associate Professor-Research, Horticulture, and Plant Pathology, Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville Citrus Center

3 Associate Professor and Extension Specialist, Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Extension Service, The Texas A&amp;M University System

picture_counter_1 no image summary

by 1947. However, in October 2015, the disease was confirmed in symptomatic lime and lemon trees in Rancho Viejo in Cameron County. In the summer of 2016, the disease was found in Houston (Harris County) and Richmond (Fort Bend County). ## SYMPTOMS

The bacterium grows and multiplies in diseased plant parts-all aboveground parts of the citrus tree are susceptible. Citrus canker causes premature leaf and fruit drop, twig dieback, general decline, and blemished fruit (Fig. 1). Blister-like lesions on leaves and fruit start small and expand as the disease progresses. These lesions may darken to tan or black and develop a water-soaked margin with a yellow halo surrounding it (Fig. 2). The center of the lesion on leaves, stems, and twigs can appear raised and corky or scabby (Fig. 3), surrounded by a water-soaked margin. Mature lesions on older symptomatic leaves may have a shot-hole look (Fig. 2) and eventually die and fall out. ## ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

This bacterium thrives in warm, moist conditions, and disease development is optimal at 68 to 86 degrees

Figure 1. Canker-affected orange. Photo courtesy of Olufemi J. Alabi

picture_counter_2 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

Fahrenheit (20 to 30 degrees Celsius). It oozes out from diseased plant parts where there is ample free moisture and easily spreads to cause new infections. The natural transmission mode is through wind and rain that spread the disease over short distances by splashing the bacterium onto other plants. Tropical storms or hurricanes can accelerate the range and speed of the disease spread. The primary way citrus canker spreads across locations is from human activities-which can move infected materials (budwood and fruit) from one place to another. The disease also spreads from tree to tree through mechanical contact with pruning and other equipment. ## CONTROL

Since there is no cure for the disease, prevention is the best approach to managing citrus canker. - Exclude the pathogen from areas it is not known to exist by buying plants, budwood, and seedlings only from TDA-certified citrus nurseries. - Implement TDA regulations before moving citrus materials (including budwood, seedlings, and fruit) within or outside of the state. - Use good sanitation practices to reduce potential disease spread. Practice general cleanliness and

picture_counter_3 no image summary

Figure 2. Lesions on leaves of an infected lime tree. Photo courtesy of Olufemi J. Alabi

picture_counter_4 no image summary

- use alcohol-based sanitizers, bleach solution, and antibacterial soap solutions to decontaminate equipment and tools. This reduces the risks associated with human and mechanical transmission of the disease. - If you suspect that a citrus plant has citrus canker, report the tree to TDA at (800) 835-5832 or online at http://www.citrusalert.com/report-a-tree for further assistance. - Remove and destroy diseased plants to eliminate potential bacteria for future infections. - Monitor nearby citrus plants. If new infections appear, act swiftly. Texas Department of Agriculture regulations require disposal of infected tree and plant material by burning or bagging and burying it at least 2 feet deep at a municipal landfill. Plant protection chemicals that contain copper can help prevent infection. These products reduce risks but do not stop the disease from occurring or cure affected trees. - Application timing is critical to provide protection. - New, growing tissues are the most susceptible to infection. - Multiple applications may be needed to ensure proper coverage on the plant. - Proper chemical use and rates are available on the product label. Always read and follow all directions and labels before using any chemical control agent. Extension Plant Pathology http://plantclinic.tamu.edu

Figure 3. Blister-like lesions on orange leaves. Photo courtesy of Olufemi J.