Phone: 864-656-3111 ! email: dpento@clemson.edu

## Spider Mites

The  first  thought  most  people  have  about  spider  mites probably relates to damage inflicted to a favorite plant by tiny creatures they could hardly see. Spider mites are pests of over 180 plant species. They are considered the number one pest of ornamental plants in the S.E. United States. Spider mites are neither spiders nor insects, yet they spin webs similar to  spiders. The  bodies  of  spider  mites  are small with no distinct segments. Spider mites usually have eight-legs  as  adults. Their  mouthparts  (chelicerae)  are designed specifically for puncturing the epidermal cells of host plants. Members of the spider mite family

Twospotted spider mite feeding damage . Photo: Clemson University - USDA Cooperative Extension Slide Series, http://www.ipmimages.org

picture_counter_1 no image summary

(Tetranychidae)  quickly  populate  their  hosts,  and  some spin visible webs on which they walk and lay eggs. The webs are especially visible when population densities are high. The most common spider mite is the two spotted spider mite, Tetranychus urticae ,  which is found on numerous host  plants. Other  common  spider  mites  include  the southern  red  mite, Oligonychus  ilicis ,  which  feeds  on spruce,  azalea,  camellia,  and  related  plants;  the  spruce spider mite, Oligonychus ununguis , the major mite pest of conifers worldwide; and the European red mite, Panonychus ulmi , a pest on many fruit trees, grapes, and roses. The  clover  mite, Bryobia  praetiosa ,  feeds  on  a number of herbaceous plants and turfgrasses; the boxwood mite, Eurytetranychus buxi , is found primarily on boxwoods. Twospotted spider mite male and eggs on a leaf. Photo: Rayanne Lehman, Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture http://www.ipmimages.org

picture_counter_2 no image summary

The two spotted spider mite female is typically larger than the male and has a rounded posterior. The slightly smaller male appears to have longer legs, and his posterior is more pointed.