Remove  and  destroy  heavily  infested  stock. Retaining  unsaleable  stock provides a  source of  further  infestation. Infested  material  should be  bagged  and  deep  buried  or  placed  in  a black  bag  in  the  sun  for  several  hours  to  kill pest thrips. Leaving unbagged, infested plants or  cuttings  in  the  bin  encourages  pests  to reinfest  the  nursery,  particularly  as  the  plant material starts to wilt and die. 6. Screens  placed  over  greenhouse  vents  and doors  can  be  used  to  help  prevent  entry  by thrips. Placement of such screens can increase the humidity in the structure, causing ventilation problems. It is recommended to use a protected cropping consultant/designer before  retrofitting  or  building  an  insect-proof tunnel or glasshouse. 7. UV  absorbing  cladding  material  and  films  on protected cropping structures can reduce thrips populations and virus infection. Photoselective shade netting is also beneficial, yellow-  or  pearl-coloured  shade  netting  can reduce  a  variety  of  pests  from  entering  the crop, sometimes  with 2-10 fold reductions compared to standard black shade cloth. 8. If  infestations  persist  for  long  periods  in  a particular area or glasshouse, grow plants that are  not  hosts  of  thrips  for  a  season  to  break the  life  cycle. Having  the  thrips  identified  to species will assist in this process. Contact your local department of agriculture or primary industries or Grow Help Australia. 9. Practice good crop hygiene to avoid contamination between greenhouses or production sites. Mark areas that are known to have  infestations  with  visible  signs  so  that workers can avoid moving through that area. 10. Avoid broad spectrum, residual chemicals that will cause high mortality of naturalised parasitoids  and predators (see section on biological control). 11. Discontinue growing crops that regularly receive significant damage. In  field  crops,  highly  reflective  mulches  can  reduce thrips populations, reducing the numbers that fly into the crop. Protected  cropping  structures  that  are highly reflective may  act  in a similar way,  but requires further study. ## Pesticides

Many  thrips  species  inhabit  protected  regions  of plants, within flowers, growing tips and leaf curl galls. For this reason, contact pesticides are only likely to strongly impact those species that mostly are on the leaf surface, unprotected. For all other thrips, systemic or translaminar products are required. Populations  of  some  species  of  thrips  can  develop pesticide resistance quite rapidly, most notably western flower thrips, onion thrips and melon thrips. For  this  reason,  it  is  important  to  rotate  between mode of action groups and to cease the application of products that have been ineffective. The presence of some thrips, particularly those feeding on pollen in flowers, cause little or no damage to plants. Therefore it is important to distinguish between those populations  that  are  incidental,  and  those  that  are likely to cause economic loss. Most  products  registered  against  thrips  relevant  to production  nurseries  are  organophosphates  (1B), synthetic  pyrethroids  (3A)  or  neonicotinoids  (4A) (Table 2). These products will have a high negative impact  on  natural  enemies  present  in  the  nursery, both those that are commercially available and those that come from surrounding habitats. It is recommended  to  avoid  the  use  of  these  products unless  there  are  no  other  options  available. See recommendations  section  for  suggested  pesticide rotations. If  thrips  are  likely  to  cause  economic damage, it is important to apply a product on multiple occasions within a short period of time, i.e. at least weekly for three  weeks. This  will assist  in  breaking the lifecycle for those species that pupate in growing media or are otherwise protected from the pesticide application. ## Biological Control

There  are  a  number  of  natural  enemies  that  can manage  thrips,  including  commercially  available predators and naturally occurring parasitoid wasps and  predators. A  range  of  pathogens  may  also infect  thrips  but  are  less  likely  to  contribute  to substantial control unless they become very abundant. There are three predators available commercially that feed on thrips on foliage. These are  the  predatory  mites Transeus  montdorensis (montdorensis) and Neoseiulus cucumeris (cucumeris)  and the pirate  bug Orius tantillus

<!-- page_break -->

(Orius). These species are more likely to contribute to  significant  thrips  management  in nursery crops. Orius in particular is the only commercially available predator that feeds on all stages of thrips found on plants including adults. There are also four soil predators that feed on thrips pupae, two mites commercially known as Hypoaspis mites, a rove beetle (Dalotia) and an entomopathogenic nematode. Details on the biology of  these  species  can  be found at  the  webpages  of Biological Services and Bugs For Bugs; the nematode is available from Ecogrow. Soil predators and nematodes are probably best suited to crops in propagation that are prone to thrips damage and for which  the  thrips  species  in  question  is  known  to pupate  in  the  soil. These  same  biological  control agents also feed on fungus gnat larvae. There are also many  naturally occurring thrips predators  that  will  move  into  production  nurseries and  become  abundant  under  the  right  conditions. These include lacewings, certain lady beetles, predatory flies, predatory thrips, mites and bugs. In addition  there  are  a  range  of  parasitoid  wasps  that attack thrips. These species can be encouraged by limiting pesticide application, particularly broad spectrum products with long residual activity. Flowering plants will often attract and retain predator species and can be used to encourage their presence in production nurseries. ## Recommendations

For  crops  that  receive  consistent,  regular  damage, particularly  in  spring,  it  is  recommended  to  take action  early. This  may  involve  the  pre-release  of  a suitable  biological  control  agent. Orius  is  a  good choice  as  they  feed  on  a  range  of  food  items including pollen and adult thrips (which are likely to be  blown  into  the  nursery  on  the  wind  in  spring). Monitor thrips populations in susceptible crops regularly during high risk periods. Follow up releases of predatory mites (cucumeris or montdorensis) can be applied regularly to limit build-up of thrips populations (probably weekly until predator populations  have  established). Contact  biological control  agent  producers  for  advice  on  how  to  best release  predators  to  optimise  success  whenever applying predators for the first time, or when uncertain of how to proceed. If  moderate numbers of thrips have occurred in the crop and predators are either already present or their release  is  planned,  it  may  be  necessary  to  apply  a low  risk  pesticide. The  following  products  will  have limited  negative  impacts  on  predator  populations, particularly if predators are released three days after pesticide application (Table 2). -  Spirotetramat
-  Spinetoram
-  Abamectin

Fig.