littoralis . A further pair of black 'trapezoidal' patches can be found just behind these, and another pair of patches towards the end of the caterpillar can also be characteristic. Some species may have a continuation of these 'trapezoidal' patches down the whole body (Fig 5). The caterpillars can grow up to 4.5 cm long. Typically, there are three orange-brown lines, punctuated with dashes of black and yellow along the body. Another characteristic marking for Spodoptera caterpillars is the light inverted 'Y' marking running down the front of the head in most commonly encountered species (Fig 6). Depending on the initial colour of the caterpillar, these markings may be more evident on some caterpillars than others. Some species such as S. exigua often lack any of the characteristic markings described above and appear unicolour with white speckles across the body (Fig 7). Adult moths are up to 2 cm long with a wingspan of approximately 4 cm. The forewings are fawn/ light brown and are covered with a variety of pale cream streaks and dashes (Fig 1). Newly emerged adults can often have a violet tint to the forewing. The hindwings are a translucent white, with brown edges. The adults are nocturnal, so are rarely seen but as with other moths they are attracted to light. As distinctive and complex as Spodoptera caterpillars are, there are several native species that could be confused, A couple are shown below the figures on the next page (Figs 8-9). <!-- page_break -->

picture_counter_2 no image summary

Copyright

picture_counter_3 no image summary

Copyright

picture_counter_4 no image summary

picture_counter_5 no image summary

Figure3.Spodopteralittoraliseggmass,Crown Copyright

Figure5.Spodopteralittoraliscaterpillarwith characteristictrapezoidalshapesalongthebodyand yellowspotsbackfromtheheadCrownCopyright

picture_counter_6 no image summary

Figure7.CaterpillarofSpodoptera exigua,note the lackofyellowspotsbehind thehead(Right) and trapezoidal shapesalong thebodyCrownCopyright

picture_counter_7 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

ornamentals.CrownCopyright

picture_counter_8 no image summary

## Biology

The life cycle of Spodoptera species is dependent on a variety of environmental factors such as humidity, temperature and the availability of food. Spodoptera have a usual moth life cycle of egg, caterpillar, pupa and then adult. The whole life cycle is completed in about 30 days. Spodoptera species can have multiple generations a year in warmer climates, and in northern Europe they are limited to about 12 generations. In warm climates with favourable conditions numbers of caterpillars can rapidly build up and it is in these situations that Spodoptera species can become a real problem. The eggs of Spodoptera take approximately 2-3 days to hatch at between 13 to 36°C depending on the species. Spodoptera caterpillars go through several growth stages before they become an adult, these growth stages are known as instars. Typically, they will go thorough 5-6 depending on diet and temperature, and in some  they can go through 7. Pupation takes place in the soil. Spodoptera species are found in all areas of the world ranging from temperate to tropical climates. Spodoptera in temperate climates have to be able to survive the winter. Like most moths that live in temperate climates certain Spodoptera species will go into diapause (a period of suspended development).