5. Montdorensis  feeding  on  a  spider  mite  egg (above); Orius searching for food (middle - Photo by Ronald Smith, Auburn Universtiy, Bugwood.org); Cucumeris next to a thrips larva (Photo by Biological Services). picture_counter_12 no image summary

picture_counter_13 no image summary

picture_counter_14 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

Add  an  oil  compound  at  label  rates  if  feasible, particularly  if  some  thrips  are  present  on  exposed plant surfaces. Always follow label pesticide resistance management strategies if they are present. Again,  if  planning  on  releasing  predators, contact the biocontrol agent producer to discuss your plan and optimise success. There  are  a  range  of  factors  that  may  prevent successful release of beneficial insects. The predator may not feed on the thrips species infesting the plants (particularly if they are tubuliferan thrips). Environmental conditions may prevent their successful release. This can occur during high summer heat, e.g. above about 35°C, or cold night time temperatures, below about 10°C. If the area of infested plants is very small, i.e. only a few square metres it may not be cost effective to apply predators. However, some products are available in 'garden packs' specifically for management of relatively small areas. In these cases, cultural management  practices  and  pesticide  applications are  likely  to  be  the  major  components  of  your management  plan  for  thrips. Refer  to  Table  2  for more detailed information on products registered for thrips in Australia. Where biological control is not practiced and naturally  occurring  beneficial  species  are  not  to  be conserved, the addition of the following products can be added to the rotation. -  Group 1B product (preferably a systemic product)
-  Fipronil
-  Group 4A product (particularly in Durivo)

## Exotic Thrips

There  are  a  number  of  thrips recorded  as  pest overseas  that  would  be  of  concern  if  introduced  into Australia. These include Bean thrips ( Caliothrips fasciatus ), a pest of legumes and citrus. In particular it causes problems in relation to the import of citrus into Australia and is regularly intercepted on navel oranges. Relatively  recent  surveys  indicate  that  it  is not present in Australia. Florida flower thrips Frankliniella bispinosa, a citrus pest in Florida. Tobacco  Thrips, Frankliniella  fusca, a  pest  of  a wide  range  of  host  plants  and  vector  of  TSWV. California citrus thrips, Scirtothrips citri , a significant pest of citrus. Avocado thrips S. perseae , a serious  pest  of  avocados. Other  exotic  thrips  would likely impact certain crops in Australia, as would exotic Tospoviruses, e.g. Impatiens necrotic spot virus . This  document  was  prepared  by  John  Duff  and  Andrew Manners (Agri-science Queensland, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Ecosciences Precinct, GPO Box 267, Brisbane QLD 4001) as part of NY15002 Building the resilience and onfarm biosecurity capacity of the Australian production nursery industry in 2016. All photos by DAF, unless otherwise stated.