L. Flint EDITOR: B. Ohlendorf DESIGN AND PRODUCTION: M. Brush ILLUSTRATIONS: Figs. 1 and 2: Pests of the Garden and Small Farm, UC DANR Publ. 3332; Fig. 3: Natural Enemies Hand- book, UC DANR Publ. 3386. PRODUCED BY IPM Education and Publications, UC Statewide IPM Project, University of California, Davis, CA 95616-8620

This Pest Note is available on the World Wide Web (http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu)

picture_counter_4 no image summary

picture_counter_5 no image summary

To  simplify  information,  trade  names  of  products have been used. No endorsement of named products is intended, nor is criticism implied of similar products that are not mentioned. This material is partially based upon work supported by the Extension Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, under special project Section 3(d), Integrated Pest Management. Many other insecticides are available to control aphids in the home garden and landscape, including foliar-applied formulations of malathion, permethrin and acephate (nonfood crops only). While these materials may kill higher numbers of aphids than soaps and oils, their use should be limited because they also kill the natural enemies that provide long-term control of aphids and other pests. Repeated applications of these materials may also result in the development of resistance to the material by the aphid. Insecticides such as oils and soaps are also safer to use when children and pets may be present. Formulations combining insecticidal soaps and pyrethrins may provide slightly more knockdown than soaps alone, yet have fewer negative impacts on natural enemies than malathion, permethrin, and acephate, because pyrethrins break down very quickly. Avoid the use of diazinon and chlorpyrifos; urban garden use of these materials has been identified as a source of pollution in California's creeks and rivers. Carbaryl is not recommended because it is not very effective against aphids. Acephate has systemic activity, which means it moves through leaves, thus it can be effective where aphids are hidden beneath curling foliage. Acephate is not registered for use on food crops in the garden because it can break down to a much more toxic material. The soilapplied systemic pesticide disulfoton is sometimes applied in roses for aphid control, but it is a highly toxic material to people. Professional applicators can make soil injections of the systemic insecticide imidacloprid, which is quite effective against aphids infesting large street trees and not very harmful to beneficial soil organisms. Because it takes a substantial time for the product to get from the soil to the growing points of trees, applications must be made up to 2 months before problems are expected. When considering application of pesticides for aphid control, remember that moderate populations of many aphids attacking leaves of fruit trees or ornamental trees and shrubs do not cause long-term damage. Low populations can be tolerated in most situations and aphids will often disappear when natural enemies or hot temperatures arrive. Often a forceful spray of water or watersoap solution, even on large street trees, when applied with appropriate equipment, will provide sufficient control. ## SUGGESTED READING

Dreistadt, S.