Kidd. <!-- page_break -->

## This and other Pest Notes are available at www.ipm.ucdavis.edu. For more information, contact the University of California Cooperative Extension office in your county. See your telephone directory for addresses and phone numbers, or visit http://ucanr.org/ce.cfm. University  of  California  scientists  and  other qualified  professionals  have  anonymously  peer reviewed this publication for technical accuracy. The ANR Associate Editor for Urban Pest Management managed this review process. To simplify information, trade names of products have been used. No endorsement of named products is intended, nor is criticism implied of similar products that are not mentioned. This  material  is  partially  based  upon  work supported by the Extension Service, U.S. Department of  Agriculture,  under  special  project  Section  3(d), Integrated Pest Management. Produced by UC Statewide Integrated Pest Management Program

University of California, Davis, CA 95616

picture_counter_10 no image summary

WARNING ON THE USE OF CHEMICALS

Pesticides are poisonous. Always read and carefully follow all precautions and safety recommendations given on the container label. Store all chemicals in the original, labeled containers in a locked cabinet or shed, away from food or feeds, and out of the reach of children, unauthorized persons, pets, and livestock. Pesticides applied in your home and landscape can move and contaminate creeks, rivers, and oceans. Confine chemicals to the property being treated. Avoid drift onto neighboring properties, especially gardens containing fruits or vegetables ready to be picked. Do not place containers containing pesticide in the trash or pour pesticides down the sink or toilet. Either use the pesticide according to the label, or take unwanted pesticides to a Household Hazardous Waste Collection site. Contact your county agricultural commissioner for additional information on safe container disposal and for the location of the Household Hazardous Waste Collection site nearest you. Dispose of empty containers by following label directions. Never reuse or burn the containers or dispose of them in such a manner that they may contaminate water supplies or natural waterways. ANR NONDISCRIMINATION AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICY STATEMENT

The University of California prohibits discrimination or harassment of any person in any of its programs or activities. The complete nondiscrimination policy statement can be found at http://ucanr.org/sites/anrstaff/ files/107734.doc. Inquiries regarding the university's equal employment opportunity policies may be directed to Linda Marie Manton, Affirmative Action Contact, University of California, Davis, Agriculture and Natural Resources, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, (530) 752-0495.