Plant beating . Gently but firmly hit foliage against a beating tray (which can be a folder, bucket or plastic plate). The beating tray should be a single colour; white or black is preferable as this will make moving organisms more visible. Beating plants is a relatively efficient way of monitoring for insects and mites that can be knocked from plants, including herbivorous and predatory mites, aphids, whitefly adults, thrips, lady beetles, small caterpillars and a variety of other insects. Sometimes the cast-off skins (exuviae) may be dislodged from plants and may provide evidence of the presence of aphids without finding living individuals. Once something is found, a 10-15x hand lens can be used to inspect the catch. 3. The presence of ants often provides an indication that aphids or another sap-sucking insect (such as scales or mealybugs) are present on a plant. Always investigate why ants are present on plants as they may lead you to a pest infestation. 4. Yellow sticky traps are useful tools for monitoring a variety of insects and can trap winged aphids. Traps should also be placed near doors, vents and any susceptible crops or areas. At least one trap per 100m 2  is recommended for greenhouse crops, more in varieties that are known to be susceptible to aphids or other flying pests. Inspect sticky traps at least weekly and change traps every 2 to 4 weeks. Presence of winged aphids, particularly if in
5. large numbers, should trigger more detailed surveys to determine the extent of the infestation. 5. Parasitised aphids turn into 'mummies' (preserved corpse - see image in Biological Control section). An aphid that has been parasitised swells into a hard, brown or black ball which is distinctly different from normal living aphids. Mummified aphids will not reproduce and will give rise to wasps which parasitise or feed on subsequent aphids. Record the level of aphid populations on each host plant in each area of your property. Accurate records can help determine long-term patterns of host use on the property and thus assist in allocating search effort. Keeping longterm records can help identify areas and varieties that are more susceptible to infestations. It is also important to continue monitoring following application of insecticides or release of biological controls to determine the effectiveness of treatments. These records can assist with making management decisions in the future. For example, wind patterns at your property may lead one to monitor certain areas more than others or greater monitoring effort during periods when key pests are likely to be present. In addition, monitoring can inform you of the level of natural enemies present in the crop, which may modify management actions. Insect monitoring data sheets are available in the BioSecure HACCP protocols which can be found on the NGIA website (www.ngia.com.au). Alternatively, simple spreadsheets can be created and modified to suit your property. Damage from aphids feeding on the growing tip of Eucalyptus leucoxylon . picture_counter_8 no image summary

<!-- page_break -->

## IDENTIFYING APHIDS

It can be very valuable to identify the species of aphid/s commonly found on your property and to educate staff on how to distinguish between them. There are a number of species that have a wide host range, however, many aphids are quite host-specific. This can be used to your advantage to gain an idea of what species may be present, particularly on native host plant species. Refer to the plant genus level listing on the Aphids on World Plants website. This can narrow down the list of aphids likely to be encountered. For example, Myoporum acuminatum has only two species of aphids reported, Aphis gossypii and Myzus persicae . It may then be possible to examine pictures of the different species from trusted websites to assist in the identification. Keep in mind that you may be dealing with a species that has not been reported on a particular host plant.